>> Anjana Vakil: Okay, now we're gonna
get a little more fun with our recursion.
So you're gonna see this little Functional
Art Studio, and you have a blank canvas.
And your mission is to implement some
functions up here, which under the hood
this little project is passing
those to that impure render SVG and
the pure get SVG art that we wrote before,
and it's rendering them into the page.
So, as you update this
function here in patterns.js,
I'm gonna call it the diamondPattern,
whatever you put here is going
to get called in art.js.
And in a non-function functional way is
gonna get exported as a global there, but
that is going to then be rendered
on this little mini app here,
which is just running
in a little vite app.
Anyway, you can look at the source
code later if you're so inclined, but
it's basically exactly what we saw before.
We're getting some data about an SVG and
we're attaching that data
to the DOM to visualize it.
Anyway, your task, should you choose to
accept it, is to draw something like this.
So this is a pattern
that involves recursion.
And I called it a diamondPattern, even
though I guess it's squares and diamonds,
whatever.
But the idea is that we want to compute
a string representing
the inner contents of
an SVG that will get rendered to the page.
So for example,
if I do return <rect, x is 0,
and y is 0, and width is 50,
and height is 50, and
the fill is rebeccapurple.
>> Anjana Vakil: Then we
get a purple rectangle.
So this isn't a class about SVG art,
although that is a super
fascinating topic that there are some
good courses on frontend masters about.
I believe Shirley Wu has a course
about data visualization with SVGs.
Anyway, but you can, of course,
use our good friend MDN to
look up the SVG reference.
If you're not used to
working with svg elements,
just using this because instead of canvas
or something, because svg is a declarative
way of describing the pixels
you wanna see on the screen.
Not the pixels, but the elements you want
to see on the screen, whereas, let's say,
using the Canvas API, very imperative.
Anyway, svgs are great,
I'm a fan, what have you.
So you can check out MDN if you need any
help with actually what do we do here?
But spoiler alert, you're basically
just gonna need [LAUGH] rect and
maybe something else is going on here.
I don't know.
So this is a challenge.
Can we write a recursive function
that takes in two colors and
a given width and
returns the string representing
the pattern that I wanna see,
which is these nested diamonds.
>> Anjana Vakil: Instead of hard coding
a rect like this with a fixed width and
a fixed height and a fixed fill, we're
gonna start computing that on the fly.
This is how we would define
a rectangle in CSS, in SVG, sorry.
Why don't we start out
with our base case where,
>> Anjana Vakil: Essentially,
>> Anjana Vakil: The width,
we don't want it to go
any smaller than 20,
cuz that's just gonna look visually
cluttered and we can't have it.
So I've just arbitrarily
set this as the stopping
point of our recursive patterning.
So in the case where
width this less than 20,
let's just return one rectangle.
But let's make sure we return it with
the correct width and the correct color.
And I'm just gonna say
we're gonna with color1.
It can only be one color.
We're gonna give it color1.
So there are a few different ways
that we could compute this string,
but my favorite and
the most declarative way to fill in
a string with a bunch of
other values that you don't
know in advance is a template
literal in JavaScript.
Have folks worked with this where instead
of these regular little single quotes,
we're gonna add backticks around this
string, and then inside of the string,
we can use the dollar sign and
curly braces to inject a value.
So in here, instead of hard coding
the width as 50, I'm gonna pass in?
>> Speaker 2: Width.
>> Anjana Vakil: Width, thank you,
[LAUGH].
And the thing is, it's a rectangle
as far as SVG is concerned, but
it's a square as far as
what we are concerned.
So we're also gonna do the same for
the height, yeah.
And then even though rebeccapurple
is our new favorite CSS color,
we are going to let the user
decide what color they want to be,
cuz they might not appreciate such
aggressive color schemes as I do.
We only have one rectangle to draw,
sorry, you don't get alternating colors,
it's just gonna be one,
and it's gonna be color1.
>> Speaker 3: Quotes?
>> Anjana Vakil: And
quotes around that is a great idea.
Okay, so if folks haven't worked with
this dollar sign curly braces thing,
I don't know what?
Because I'm calling it not width 20.
Let's change that.
>> Anjana Vakil: Okay, so
if I call it width 20,
I get a little tiny green square,
cool, face case.
Now, all we need to do
is the rest of the haul.
Okay, so
I'm going to return not only the color1
with square, but the rest of the stuff.
So that means, to start out,
it maybe looks very similar
to what we did before, okay?
This is gonna be the first
part of our SVG,
it's always gonna be this main big square.
Now I'm gonna move this back to here.
Okay, so,
>> Anjana Vakil: First
we need to draw this layer of the pattern,
if you will.
And then we need to draw the next
smaller layer of the pattern,
and the next smaller layer
is gonna be a smaller width.
That's just basically the hypotenuse
of the half of the two,
anyway, [LAUGH] so
it fits perfectly in the square.
I've already done that for you.
Thank you, built-in Math.SQRT2.
And we're going to compute a new
rectangle of the smaller width,
but we want it to be a different color,
and we want it to be diagonal.
So here I'm going to continue using
my declarative string template here,
and I'm just going to add some space so
we can do some other things.
Now here, if I wanted another
rectangle that is,
>> Anjana Vakil: A very
similar pattern to the one
that I'm currently making,
just with some different values,
I'm gonna want to, and
spoiler alert,
we know this is the recursive case.
I'm gonna want to call a function that's
great at producing patterns like this,
which is?
>> Speaker 3: DiamondPattern.
>> Speaker 4: DiamondPattern.
>> Anjana Vakil: Myself,
diamondPattern, exactly.
Okay, and now the values that I pass
in are gonna be a little different.
So can anybody help me guild this?
At each layer if were thinking about
them as layers of the pattern,
we're gonna flip the colors.
So instead of passing in color1, color2?
>> Speaker 3: Color2, color1.
>> Anjana Vakil: Color2,
color1 [LAUGH] swapsies, and
then instead of passing in width?
>> Speaker 5: Smaller widths.
>> Anjana Vakil: Smaller width.
Bingo, okay, well,
now something's happening,
we've got recursion, we can see it.
They keep getting smaller and smaller and
they keep switching colors,
so that feels good.
>> Speaker 6: Looks
like infinite hall way.
>> Anjana Vakil: It is sort of
giving us three dimensional vibes.
So what we need to start
doing now is rotating them.
And in order to do that,
we can wrap this rect that's gonna
come back from diamondPattern.
So what we'll do is we'll just
go to the element reference,
and you're just gonna have to
trust me that there is this g
element that's kind of the div
that we want from our HTML.
Security net, I don't know,
from how we're used to thinking about
transforming elements on the page,
by, let's say, having a div
wrapper that then is transformed.
We'll do the same with g in here.
So whatever, if we wrap some elements,
some SVG content,
in a g, then whatever attributes we set
on the g are gonna apply to the group.
So we can for example, set a bunch
of properties for multiple things.
Okay, so let's wrap this in a g,
which, by itself,
just like a div, doesn't do anything.
In order to manipulate this g, we can
pass a value to the transform attribute
that uses some of these built-in
transform functions similar to CSS.
So for example, I can rotate it 45 degrees
and now, I mean, it doesn't look right,
but at least we've got one little pointy
thing that looks sort of similar,
so that's cool.
So what I'll also need to
do is keep making sure
that everything is centered essentially.
And because all these SVGs
are gonna start at 0,
0, we're gonna kind of
translate this whole system.
It's gonna get rotated,
but then we also wanna
change the point of 0,0 and
where it starts.
So right now we translated it,
sorry, we rotated it, but 0,
0 is still in the top left corner,
same as it was before.
So instead what I wanna do is take this
point, this top of the diamond thing,
that's a little hard to see cuz
it's on top of the other diamond,
and we wanna move it here to
the middle of the square.
And so I can use a translate for that.
Can anybody help me fill in
my translate operation here?
>> Anjana Vakil: And this is where I'm
gonna need to maybe do a little math.
So I'm gonna add a dollar curlies.
And let's say, for example,
if I translate it to the width,
it pops all the way
over to the other side.
That's also not what I want.
You're halfway there?
Halfway there, so
if I divide the width by 2,
now we're cooking with gas or
pure functions.
So what we've got is a purely
recursive real-world object.
Pixels on the page count as
a real-world object in this sense,
because remember,
before we wrote that impure render SVG,
we wrapped all of that impurity of
actually taking this string that we're
computing here and putting it into
the page and making it pixels.
So what we're doing here is we're
just computing that string,
and we're doing it in
a totally declarative way.
We're saying I wanna a string
that looks like this, and
these are the values I
wanna inject into it.
And in order to get our repetition here,
sure, I could have asked you
to do this with a for loop, but
where would be the fun in that?
So in order to do that repetition of
keep going, keep going, keep going,
keep going, we use recursion.
So this is a simple and
yet, I hope illustrative,
example, [LAUGH],
of kind of how we could use
recursion to make recursive things work in
a declarative way without
having to write a for loop and
keep going through each
of the smaller squares.